we all start life as
one single cell then that cell divides
and we're two cells
then four then eight cells form tissues
tissues form organs
organs form us these cell divisions by
which we go from a single cell
to 100 trillion cells are called
growth and growth seems like a simple
thing because when we think of it we
typically think of someone getting
taller
or later in life wider but to cells
growth
isn't simple cell division is an
intricate chemical dance that's part
individual
part community driven and in a
neighborhood of a hundred trillion
cells sometimes things go wrong
maybe an individual cell's set of
instructions or dna
gets a typo what we call a mutation most
of the time the cell senses mistakes and
shuts itself down
or the system detects a troublemaker and
eliminates it but
enough mutations can bypass these
failsafes driving the cell to divide
recklessly
that one rogue cell becomes two then
four
then eight at every stage the incorrect
instructions are passed along to the
cell's offspring
weeks months or years after that one
rogue cell transformed
you might see your doctor about a lump
in your breast difficulty going to the
bathroom could reveal a problem in your
intestine
prostate or bladder or a routine blood
test might count too many white cells or
elevated liver enzymes
your doctor delivers the bad news it's
cancer from here your strategy will
depend on where the cancer
is and how far it's progressed if the
tumor is slow growing and in one place
surgery might be all you need if
anything if the tumor is fast growing or
invading nearby tissue your doctor might
recommend radiation or surgery followed
by radiation
if the cancer has spread or if it's
inherently everywhere like a leukemia
your doctor will most likely recommend
chemotherapy
or a combination of radiation and chemo
radiation and
most forms of chemo work by physically
shredding the cell's dna
or disrupting the copying machinery but
neither radiation nor chemotherapeutic
drugs target
only cancer cells radiation hits
whatever you pointed at
and your bloodstream carries
chemotherapeutics all over your body
so what happens when different cells get
hit let's look at a healthy liver cell
a healthy hair cell and a cancerous cell
the healthy liver cell divides only when
it's stressed
the healthy hair cell divides frequently
and the cancer cell divides even more
frequently
and recklessly when you take a
chemotherapeutic drug it will hit
all of these cells and remember that the
drugs work typically by disrupting cell
division so every time a cell divides
it opens itself up to attack and that
means that the more frequently a cell
divides the more likely the drug is to
kill it
so remember that hair cell it divides
frequently and
isn't a threat and there are other
frequently dividing cells in your body
like skin cells gut cells and blood
cells
so the list of unpleasant side effects
of cancer treatment parallels these
tissue types
hair loss skin rashes nausea vomiting
fatigue
weight loss and pain that makes sense
because these are the cells that get hit
the hardest
so in the end it's all about growth
cancer hijacks sells natural division
machinery and
forces them to put the pedal to the
metal growing rapidly
and recklessly but using
chemotherapeutic drugs we take advantage
of that aggressiveness
and we turn cancer's main strength into
a weakness
you